Symbolism for Luxury Brands
===

II.1.6. Symbolism

[https://upmarkit.com/concept-of-luxury-brands/characteristics-of-luxury-products/symbolism#](https://upmarkit.com/concept-of-luxury-brands/characteristics-of-luxury-products/symbolism#)

While mass market products mainly stand for their functionality, luxury products generate numerous non-functional, abstract associations. Mortelmans (2005, p. 505) argues that "every notion of functionality is reduced as far as possible." In fact, there is no other product category with a similar relevance of symbolic benefits, which often even exceeds its functional benefits. One of the respondents explained: "I have a very special relationship to cars. They have to turn me on. It’s very much about feelings, a lot of feelings. A [Mercedes] S-class can come with super features, but it just doesn’t turn me on." Another respondent thinks that these products "have a lot to say – they talk to you."

The symbolic meaning refers to a large extent to human values and lifestyles (Kapferer 2001, p. 321; Vigneron and Johnson 2004, p. 490). Consequently, the symbolism of luxury products and brands is covered to a large extent by the concept of brand personality, which was adapted to the luxury segment by Heine (2009). The five major dimensions of the luxury brand personality include modernity, prestige, sensuality, understatement and eccentricity.

Luxury products cannot symbolize anything, but just as with their aesthetics, they need to comply with the worldview and taste of the upper class. Kapferer and Bastien (2009b, p. 314) argues that "the DNA of luxury is the symbolic desire to belong to a superior class." Therefore, all luxury brands have to possess a high level of prestige, which they also have to symbolize at least to some extent (Keller 2009, p.291).

Symbolic meaning can be conveyd through product design (Kotler et al. 2007, p. 636; Valtin 2004, p. 116) or with specific product information, for instance by indicating that a famous movie star recommends the product. Luxury products are often linked to popular celebrities, prestigious events or an attractive country-of-origin (Keller 2009, p. 292). An oenophile daydreamed: "It is very fascinating to open a bottle of wine from 1912, which witnessed two World Wars – and when you imagine everything that has happened since that time..." Of course, the symbolic meaning of luxury products is also highly influenced by their brands (see also Meert and Lasslop 2003, p. 5; Nueono and Quelch 1998, p. 62).

This chapter explained in detail the characteristics of luxury products. According to their definition, luxury brands have to create associations about a high level of price, quality, aesthetics, rarity, extraordinariness and a high degree of symbolic meaning, which can only be achieved by adequate marketing and especially communication measures. Because of their high relevance, the next chapter gives an overview about the major marketing-mix strategies that allow for the influencing of consumer perceptions about the major luxury characteristics.