**10. Get it down to numbers. (TLDRs; skip this part)**
its hard to explain this part with words so I'll give an example with numbers.
You suspect your packs are being profiled.
If there is profiling going on, your courier is going to be considered the starting point of the heat.
We will give it a 80% heat rating for this very event. Considering the courier access 3 times a week a stash, you will give the stash a 50% heat rating, just from this very link. the stash himself is linked to the lab, but only access it onces every 2 weeks. you will give your lab a 15% heat rating from this very event. Your treshold of risk is 70% (meaning you will shut down someone/somewhere that has over 70% heat rating), at this point you will shut down the courier and have him lay low, but the heat is not yet sufficient to close the stash and the lab, at 50% and 15% respectivelyNow a few days later you see a cop car parked on the street of your lab. This very event is worth 50% heat on your lab, and will also drip a 20% heat on your stash and 5% on your courier due to the links.Now shit got hot. Everything is above 70%. closing the entire branch.You'll admit it doesn't take math to notice that if your packs are being profiled AND a cop car is seen near your lab, you must be pretty hot as a whole and you SHOULD shut down. All I did was add numbers to follow the flow of heat and decide wisely what is hot and what is not. My objective is to keep all places around 30-40% heat which i consider a stable zone. If 60-70% is reached im going to start investigating very closely, but I will not close it down. If it busts 80% then its being closed down and laid low for a few weeks. Its not accurate because you have to estimate everything with little to no information, but it definitely helps seeing things and calculate your moves. If an event bust 150%, i will completely dismantle the place and move it to another spot.

**16. Not everyone has to know everyone.**
Its everyone's dream to think its like the movies where we gangsta organise "cartel parties" where everyone is invited. It doesn't work that way. If someone doesn't have to meet someone, don't make them meet. Don't take the risk of adding up more "heat rating" by creating un-necessary links between individuals who are not directly connected.

**21. Make sure your team's opsec is always on point.**
Meet regularly with your administrators and have them tell you all the problems. Never get angry and don't judge them. They'll be much more open if they do not fear your reaction. Everyone can make mistakes. Your administrators should have the same attitude toward their employees. A transparent company allows you to see more problems and react accordingly.

**18. Be diplomat when kicking people out**
Always be very diplomat when kicking people out. Give them a nice fat good-bye paycheck and specify you're giving them this paycheck to "forget everything". Keep good terms and explain your decisions with opsec and that you're doing this for their own protection.

**12. Family links between employees are powerful.**
If you testify in court, you don't get to choose who you snitch and who you don't (In Canada at least). You snitch everything or nothing. So it helps if employees get caught with members of their families, because they are much less likely to snitch as it would involve having them snitch on their own family. You can also use the trust between members of a single family to your advantage. You can normally trust your employee's brother or sister pretty much the same as you can trust your employee. assuming both work for you.

**9. Have separate different secret workspots, and different labs.**
In order to confuse investigations, its mandatory to have different personnel, workspots, and labs. If i feel that heat is growing on one lab, I can quickly clean it up, have the worker stop and lay low for a while, and i simply transfer the workload over another less-heated up lab and production-guy. Its very difficult to see all the connections amongst various people especially when dealing with over 30 employees, but its needed. These connections are what will carry heat. I tend to think of it a bit like a computer would:

**8. Rotate your employees between jobs**
By rotating your employees between various work in your company you not only prevent heat from accumulating on one particular place or person, confusing investigations, but you're also contributing to their general training. this has various positive consequences; You are able to better target the quality and flaws of your various employees by having them try numerous different things. Also, if a branch of the operation is arrested, you can quickly reach out to your other personnel who has done similar work in the past to fill the voids.

**7. Don't hire people yourself**
People close to you, that you love and value, should not be getting their hands dirty on the long run. have them quit, or promote them quickly, if you have them on the field. As soon as they've mastered their work, have them hire their own friend to do your work, and pay both.

**6. Back your own people**
Make sure all of your people are properly lawyered up. have them know by heart the name and phone number of their designated lawyer (under your control) and have them meet regularly, all expenses paid by you, in order to strengthen this trust between the lawyer and the employee.

**2. Separate Administration & Execution**
Have a layer of people who are doing the "boss" work and another one who is doing the "executive" work. Boss work is mainly paperwork and verifications to ensure everyone is doing his job properly and numbers balance and quality control is in check. Administrators dont get their hand dirty as that they will not handle the drugs themselves, but they will make sure packs are being shipped, tracking codes are being handled, productions are being made correctly and such. Administration is a promotion for executives who have shown a great degree of skill and loyalty. You can't put just anyone to overlook someone else's work. You have to get someone who has done it before and will be able to train new personnel or solve irregular issues. I normally promote my executors to administrators once they have shown that they can handle any issue from their business. I have them hire one of their friend and pay both from my own pocket. Employees kind of like hearing "hey, how about you keep your salary, train your friend to do your job, and you both will earn the same thing, paid from the big boss' pocket." More than money, people want power. Give power to people who want power and keep the money for yourself.

**1. Outsource**
Outsourcing simply refers to the noble art of hiring other people, "pawns of the checker", to do the dirty work. You want to hire clean people that dont arise suspicions. They will be doing the dirty work so you want to hire someone who isn't already involved in drug trade or has priors. Don't get me wrong, you'll do everything in your power to protect them. Remember, if your guys catch heat, it can propagate to deeper layers fairly quickly and ultimately, to you.