Technology alone is not enough.
It's technology married with liberal arts, married with humanities, that yields us the results that make our heart sing.

> technology gets adopted because people use it and it's made for humans


Introduce the new with the familiar. when you introduce something new, don’t do new on top of new because no one knows what you’re talking about. Sometimes technologists get very excited about their own technology and they forget to build the stepping stones to bring people on.

Back in the early 1990s, a company called General Magic (today dubbed “the greatest startup that you have never heard of”) imagined what would be the first smartphone. The device would be able to grant immediate access to the internet and enable users to send emails (essentially text messages) to each other through a touch screen. As they shipped, the company quickly found out that the existing network infrastructure wasn’t quite ready to support such a concept yet. The product did not sell and the company ended up failing. However, General Magic’s commercial failure wasn’t only due to the fact that they were way ahead of their time technologically. The market simply was not ready for such a product. Their Magic Link device was released back in 1994 when most people were still using pagers and certainly did not have email addresses. So, why would they want a clunky $800 device to send emails? Not only does this question bring us back to the necessity of relating your business to the human condition, but it also points out the importance of introducing new ideas and technologies with familiar concepts so they can be more readily accepted. General Magic’s vision wouldn’t be realized until 2007 with the launch of the first iPhone, which so many of us hold onto so dearly today.

[We should understand] that technology must never be accepted as part of the natural order of things, that every technology—from an IQ test to an automobile to a television to ac computer—is a product of a particular economic and political context and carries with it a program, and agenda, and a philosophy that may or may not be life-enhancing and that therefore require scrutiny, criticism, and control.


If you think about it, culture and memory are the only things we have. We treasure cultural memory because we use that knowledge to build and produce everything we have around us. That knowledge is going to help us build the future and solve the problems we have yet to solve. If aliens come here and wave a magic wand and make everyone forget everything—our cars, buildings, bridges, airplanes, our power systems, and so forth, we would collapse as a society immediately.